README.md, before:

# Blog Management API

A RESTful API for managing blog posts, users, and tags built with ASP.NET Core 8, implementing CQRS
pattern with MediatR, FluentValidation, JWT authentication, Redis caching and PostgreSQL database. 

## Table of Contents
- [Technology Stack](#technology-stack)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Setup & Installation](#setup--installation)
- [API Endpoints](#api-endpoints)
- [Error Handling](#error-handling)
- [Caching Strategy](#caching-strategy)
- [Database Schema](#database-schema)
- [AI Usage Disclosure](#ai-usage-disclosure)

## Technology Stack
- **Framework**: ASP.NET Core 8
- **Database**: PostgreSQL 15
- **ORM**: Entity Framework Core
- **Architecture**: CQRS with MediatR
- **Authentication**: JWT Bearer
- **Caching**: Redis (StackExchange.Redis)
- **API Documentation**: Swagger (OpenAPI)
- **Containerization**: Docker &  Docker Compose
- **Password Hashing**: BCrypt
- **Validation**: FluentValidation

## Architecture

### CQRS Pattern
This project implements **Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS)** using MediatR
- **Commands** - operations that modify states (create, update, Delete)
- **Queries** - operations that read data (get, list)

```txt
Assessment/
├── Controllers/        # API endpoints (thin layer)
├── Features/           # CQRS operations organized by domain
│   ├── Auth/           # Registration, Login
│   ├── Posts/          # Post CRUD operations
│   ├── Tags/           # Tag operations
│   └── Profiles/       # User profile operations
├── Models/             # Entity models
├── Data/               # DbContext
├── Services/           # JwtService, RedisService
├── Middleware/         # Global error handling
└── Behaviors/          # MediatR pipeline behaviors (validation)
```

## Key Design Decisions
### 1. Global Error Handling
- Implemented [ExceptionHandlingMiddleware](cci:1://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/Middleware/ExceptionHandlingMiddleware.cs:12:4-16:5) to catch all exceptions and return a standardized error response.
- Returns consistent JSON error response
- Eliminates repetitive try-catch blocks in controllers

### 2. Redis Caching
- Tags are cached for 10 minutes (read-heavy, rarely changes)
- Cache is invalidated when a new tag is created
- Improves performance for frequently accessed data (such as tags)

### 3. Password Security
- Passwords are hashsed using BCrypt (industry standard)
- Never store passwords in plain text

### 4. JWT Authentication
- Stateless authentication using JWT tokens
- Tokens are short-lived (60 minutes)
- User ID and email stored in claims

## Prerequisites
- [.NET 8 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0)
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) (if running locally without Docker)
- [Redis](https://redis.io/download) (if running locally without Docker)

## Setup & Installation

###  Option 1: Docker (Reccomended)

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ChoccyMarino/Assessment
cd Assessment
```

2. **Run with Docker Compose**
```bash
docker-compose up --build -d
```
This will start:
- API on https://localhost:5200
- Postgres on localhost:5433
- Redis on localhost:6379

3. **Access Swagger UI**
   - Access Swagger UI at `http://localhost:5200/swagger`

### Option 2: Local Development
1. **Update connection strings in appsettings.json**
- Update the connection strings in [appsettings.json](cci:1://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/appsettings.json:1:4-1:4) to point to your local Postgres and Redis databases.
```json
"ConnectionStrings": {
  "DefaultConnection": "Host=localhost;Port=5432;Database=BlogDB;Username=postgres;Password=yourpassword"
}
```

2. **Run migrations**
```bash
dotnet ef database update
```

3. **Start Redis (if using caching)**
```bash
redis-server
```

4. **Run the application**
```bash
dotnet run
```

- the API will be available at https://localhost:5200

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
#### Register User
```json
POST /api/auth/register
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "username": "johndoe",
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "password": "password123"
}
```

#### Response (200 OK)

```json
{
    "success": true,
    "message": "User created successfully",
    "userId": 1
}
```

#### Login

```json
POST /api/auth/login
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "password": "password123"
}
```

#### Response (200 OK)

```json
{
    "success": true,
    "message": "Login successful",
    "token": "eyJhbGciOiJ..."
}
```

### Posts (Require Authentication)
#### Create Post
```json
POST /api/posts
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "title": "My First Post",
    "content": "This is my first post",
    "tagIds": [1, 2, 3]
}
```

#### List Posts
```json
GET /api/posts?userId=1
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

#### Update Post
```json
PUT /api/posts/{postId}
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "title": "This is my updated post",
    "content": "This is my updated post",
    "tagIds": [1, 3]
}
```

#### Delete Post
```json
DELETE /api/posts/{postId}
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

### Tags
#### Create Tag
```json
POST /api/tags
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "name": "My Tag"
}
```
#### List All Tags (cached)
```json
GET /api/tags
```

#### Response (200 OK)
``` json
{
    "success": true,
    "tags": [
        { "id": 1, "name": "My Tag" },
        { "id": 2, "name": "My Tag 2" },
    ]
}
```

### User Profile
#### Get Profile
```json
GET /api/profile
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

#### Update Profile
```json
PUT /api/profile
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "bio": "This is my updated bio"
}
```

## Error Handling

All errors are handled by [ExceptionHandlingMiddleware](cci:2://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/Middleware/ExceptionHandlingMiddleware.cs:7:0-75:1) and return a consistent JSON format:

```json
{
    "success": false,
    "message": "Error description."
    "errors": [ /* validation errors if applicable */ ]
}
```

### HTTP Status Codes
- 400 Bad Request - validation errors
- 401 Unauthorized - missing or invalid JWT token
- 404 Not Found - resource not found
- 500 Internal Server Error - Unexpected error

## Caching Strategy
Redis caching is implemented for the Tags endpoint:
- Cache key: `tags_list`
- Cache expiration: 10 minutes
- Invalidation: Cache is cleared when a new tag is created

### Why Tags Only
- Tags are read-heavy and rarely change
- Perfect  candidate for caching

## Database Schema
```txt
Users (1) ←→ (1) UserProfiles
  ↓ (1:N)
Posts (N) ←→ (N) Tags (via PostTags junction table)
```
Key Relationships:
- User <-> UserProfile: One to one relationship
- User -> Post: One to many relationship
- Posts <-> Tags: Many to many relationship (via PostTags junction table)

### Indexes & Rationale
- **Users.Email (Unique)**: Frequent lookups during login/registration; uniqueness ensures no duplicate accounts.
- **Users.Username (Unique)**: Ensures unique identity; used for public profile URLs (potential future feature).
- **Posts.UserId (Foreign Key)**: Optimizes "Get My Posts" queries by filtering on UserId.
- **PostTags.PostId, PostTags.TagId (Composite)**: Ensures a tag is only added once to a post; optimizes join queries.

## Logging & Monitoring

**Logging Framework**: Microsoft.Extensions.Logging (built-in)

**Whats Logged:**
- Unhandled exceptions (via ExceptionHandlingMiddleware)
- EF Core database queries (in Development mode)
- Application startup / shutdown events

## API Rate Limiting

**Current Status:** Not implemented

**Production Approach:**
- Use ASP.NET Core built-in rate limiting middleware (.NET 7+)
- Configure per-user limits (e.g., 100 requests/ minute per JWT token)
- Return '429 Too Many Requests' when limit exceeded

## AI Usage Disclosure
### Transparency Statement
I used AI assistants (Claude AI and Google Gemini) as learning tools and pair programming partners. AI helped with:
- Learning new patterns : MediatR CQRS pattern, FluentValidation pipeline, Redis caching strategies
- Code structure guidance: Suggested folder organization, middleware implementation, Docker configuration
- Debugging: Helped identify issues like HTTPS redirection in docker, port conflicts in docker-compose, and debugging middleware
- Best practices: JWT configuration, BCrypt password hashing, global error handling.

### What I Did:
- Typed every line of code myself. No copy-paste from AI responses
- Made all architectural decisions. Chose to use CQRS, Redis for tags, Docker for deployment
- Asked questions to understand. After each code snippet, I asked the AI to explain concepts to ensure I understood
- Debugged and tested. Ran the application, tested endpoints, fixed issues independently

### Why This Approach
- I'm a self taught developer learning advanced patterns (MediatR, Redis) for the first time.
- AI accelerated my learning curve while ensuring I understood each concept properly.
- This mirrors real - world development where developers use documentation, StackOverflow, and other resources to learn.

### Honest Assessment
- I understand the code I wrote
- I can explain the architecture and design decisions
- I'm ready to discuss any part of this project in detail

## Notes
- Password policy: Minimum 8 characters, at least 1 uppercase, 1 lowercase, 1 number, 1 special character (enforced by FluentValidation)
- JWT token expiry time: 60 minutes
- Swagger: available in all environments (including production for demo purposes)
- HTTPS Redirection: Disabled in Docker (handled by reverse proxy in production)

Commit message:

refactor(api): simplify controllers and update configurations
Remove unnecessary try-catch blocks and unused imports from AuthController and ProfilesController. Update README to reflect HTTP URLs and add Redis setup instructions. Add Entity Framework logging in development settings and Redis configuration in appsettings.json.

README.md, after:

# Blog Management API

A RESTful API for managing blog posts, users, and tags built with ASP.NET Core 8, implementing CQRS
pattern with MediatR, FluentValidation, JWT authentication, Redis caching and PostgreSQL database. 

## Table of Contents
- [Technology Stack](#technology-stack)
- [Architecture](#architecture)
- [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
- [Setup & Installation](#setup--installation)
- [API Endpoints](#api-endpoints)
- [Error Handling](#error-handling)
- [Caching Strategy](#caching-strategy)
- [Database Schema](#database-schema)
- [AI Usage Disclosure](#ai-usage-disclosure)

## Technology Stack
- **Framework**: ASP.NET Core 8
- **Database**: PostgreSQL 15
- **ORM**: Entity Framework Core
- **Architecture**: CQRS with MediatR
- **Authentication**: JWT Bearer
- **Caching**: Redis (StackExchange.Redis)
- **API Documentation**: Swagger (OpenAPI)
- **Containerization**: Docker &  Docker Compose
- **Password Hashing**: BCrypt
- **Validation**: FluentValidation

## Architecture

### CQRS Pattern
This project implements **Command Query Responsibility Segregation (CQRS)** using MediatR
- **Commands** - operations that modify states (create, update, Delete)
- **Queries** - operations that read data (get, list)

```txt
Assessment/
├── Controllers/        # API endpoints (thin layer)
├── Features/           # CQRS operations organized by domain
│   ├── Auth/           # Registration, Login
│   ├── Posts/          # Post CRUD operations
│   ├── Tags/           # Tag operations
│   └── Profiles/       # User profile operations
├── Models/             # Entity models
├── Data/               # DbContext
├── Services/           # JwtService, RedisService
├── Middleware/         # Global error handling
└── Behaviors/          # MediatR pipeline behaviors (validation)
```

## Key Design Decisions
### 1. Global Error Handling
- Implemented [ExceptionHandlingMiddleware](cci:1://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/Middleware/ExceptionHandlingMiddleware.cs:12:4-16:5) to catch all exceptions and return a standardized error response.
- Returns consistent JSON error response
- Eliminates repetitive try-catch blocks in controllers

### 2. Redis Caching
- Tags are cached for 10 minutes (read-heavy, rarely changes)
- Cache is invalidated when a new tag is created
- Improves performance for frequently accessed data (such as tags)

### 3. Password Security
- Passwords are hashsed using BCrypt (industry standard)
- Never store passwords in plain text

### 4. JWT Authentication
- Stateless authentication using JWT tokens
- Tokens are short-lived (60 minutes)
- User ID and email stored in claims

## Prerequisites
- [.NET 8 SDK](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/8.0)
- [Docker Desktop](https://www.docker.com/products/docker-desktop)
- [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/download/) (if running locally without Docker)
- [Redis](https://redis.io/download) (if running locally without Docker)

## Setup & Installation

###  Option 1: Docker (Reccomended)

1. **Clone the repository**
```bash
git clone https://github.com/ChoccyMarino/Assessment
cd Assessment
```

2. **Run with Docker Compose**
```bash
docker-compose up --build -d
```
This will start:
- API on http://localhost:5200
- Postgres on localhost:5433
- Redis on localhost:6379

3. **Access Swagger UI**
   - Access Swagger UI at `http://localhost:5200/swagger`

### Option 2: Local Development
1. **Update connection strings in appsettings.json**
- Set both Postgres and Redis connection strings in [appsettings.json](cci:1://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/appsettings.json:1:4-1:4) to point to your local Postgres and Redis databases.
```json
"ConnectionStrings": {
  "DefaultConnection": "Host=localhost;Port=5432;Database=BlogDB;Username=postgres;Password=yourpassword"
},
"Redis": {
    "ConnectionString": "localhost:6379"
}
```
Docker compose already sets Redis_ConnectionString=redis, so  you only need the Redis block for local development.

2. **Run migrations**
```bash
dotnet ef database update
```

3. **Start Redis (if using caching)**
```bash
redis-server
```

4. **Run the application**
```bash
dotnet run
```

- the API will be available at http://localhost:5200

## API Endpoints

### Authentication
#### Register User
```json
POST /api/auth/register
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "username": "johndoe",
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "password": "password123"
}
```

#### Response (200 OK)

```json
{
    "success": true,
    "message": "User created successfully",
    "userId": 1
}
```

#### Login

```json
POST /api/auth/login
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "email": "john@example.com",
    "password": "password123"
}
```

#### Response (200 OK)

```json
{
    "success": true,
    "message": "Login successful",
    "token": "eyJhbGciOiJ..."
}
```

### Posts (Require Authentication)
#### Create Post
```json
POST /api/posts
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "title": "My First Post",
    "content": "This is my first post",
    "tagIds": [1, 2, 3]
}
```

#### List Posts
```json
GET /api/posts?userId=1
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

#### Update Post
```json
PUT /api/posts/{postId}
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "title": "This is my updated post",
    "content": "This is my updated post",
    "tagIds": [1, 3]
}
```

#### Delete Post
```json
DELETE /api/posts/{postId}
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

### Tags
#### Create Tag
```json
POST /api/tags
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "name": "My Tag"
}
```
#### List All Tags (cached)
```json
GET /api/tags
```

#### Response (200 OK)
``` json
{
    "success": true,
    "tags": [
        { "id": 1, "name": "My Tag" },
        { "id": 2, "name": "My Tag 2" },
    ]
}
```

### User Profile
#### Get Profile
```json
GET /api/profile
Authorization: Bearer {token}
```

#### Update Profile
```json
PUT /api/profile
Authorization: Bearer {token}
Content-Type: application/json

{
    "bio": "This is my updated bio"
}
```

## Error Handling

All errors are handled by [ExceptionHandlingMiddleware](cci:2://file:///c:/Users/MSI/source/repos/Assessment/Middleware/ExceptionHandlingMiddleware.cs:7:0-75:1) and return a consistent JSON format:

```json
{
    "success": false,
    "message": "Error description."
    "errors": [ /* validation errors if applicable */ ]
}
```

### HTTP Status Codes
- 400 Bad Request - validation errors
- 401 Unauthorized - missing or invalid JWT token
- 404 Not Found - resource not found
- 500 Internal Server Error - Unexpected error

## Caching Strategy
Redis caching is implemented for the Tags endpoint:
- Cache key: `tags_list`
- Cache expiration: 10 minutes
- Invalidation: Cache is cleared when a new tag is created

### Why Tags Only
- Tags are read-heavy and rarely change
- Perfect  candidate for caching

## Database Schema
```txt
Users (1) ←→ (1) UserProfiles
  ↓ (1:N)
Posts (N) ←→ (N) Tags (via PostTags junction table)
```
Key Relationships:
- User <-> UserProfile: One to one relationship
- User -> Post: One to many relationship
- Posts <-> Tags: Many to many relationship (via PostTags junction table)

### Indexes & Rationale
- **Users.Email (Unique)**: Frequent lookups during login/registration; uniqueness ensures no duplicate accounts.
- **Users.Username (Unique)**: Ensures unique identity; used for public profile URLs (potential future feature).
- **Posts.UserId (Foreign Key)**: Optimizes "Get My Posts" queries by filtering on UserId.
- **PostTags.PostId, PostTags.TagId (Composite)**: Ensures a tag is only added once to a post; optimizes join queries.

## Logging & Monitoring

**Logging Framework**: Microsoft.Extensions.Logging (built-in)

**Whats Logged:**
- Unhandled exceptions (via ExceptionHandlingMiddleware)
- EF Core database queries (in Development mode)
- Application startup / shutdown events

## API Rate Limiting

**Current Status:** Not implemented

**Production Approach:**
- Use ASP.NET Core built-in rate limiting middleware (.NET 7+)
- Configure per-user limits (e.g., 100 requests/ minute per JWT token)
- Return '429 Too Many Requests' when limit exceeded

## AI Usage Disclosure
### Transparency Statement
I used AI assistants (Claude AI and Google Gemini) as learning tools and pair programming partners. AI helped with:
- Learning new patterns : MediatR CQRS pattern, FluentValidation pipeline, Redis caching strategies
- Code structure guidance: Suggested folder organization, middleware implementation, Docker configuration
- Debugging: Helped identify issues like HTTPS redirection in docker, port conflicts in docker-compose, and debugging middleware
- Best practices: JWT configuration, BCrypt password hashing, global error handling.

### What I Did:
- Typed every line of code myself. No copy-paste from AI responses
- Made all architectural decisions. Chose to use CQRS, Redis for tags, Docker for deployment
- Asked questions to understand. After each code snippet, I asked the AI to explain concepts to ensure I understood
- Debugged and tested. Ran the application, tested endpoints, fixed issues independently

### Why This Approach
- I'm a self taught developer learning advanced patterns (MediatR, Redis) for the first time.
- AI accelerated my learning curve while ensuring I understood each concept properly.
- This mirrors real - world development where developers use documentation, StackOverflow, and other resources to learn.

### Honest Assessment
- I understand the code I wrote
- I can explain the architecture and design decisions
- I'm ready to discuss any part of this project in detail

## Notes
- Password policy: Minimum 8 characters, at least 1 uppercase, 1 lowercase, 1 number, 1 special character (enforced by FluentValidation)
- JWT token expiry time: 60 minutes
- Swagger: available in all environments (including production for demo purposes)
- HTTPS Redirection: disabled for now (Program.cs comments it out). It runs over HTTP at :5200
